At the annual meeting of Jehovah's Witnesses held in October 2013, the governing body was
pleased to announce the opening of a new display in Brooklyn, New York, entitled The Bible
and the Divine Name.
We're happy to provide you with an update on what has happened since that time.
Our brothers have been excited about the display.
More than 133,000 have come to visit since the opening.
Many have also shown their interest by donating rare and valuable Bibles to enhance this collection.
We are pleased to share some information about some of these fascinating Bibles.
At the 2013 annual meeting, we expressed interest in obtaining a first edition copy of the
King James Bible, which was printed in the year 1611.
Well, we received a surprising email shortly thereafter.
A brother wrote and told us that he had located the King James Bible we were looking for.
He explained that while visiting with an elderly couple in his congregation, he mentioned
that the governing body was interested in locating this particular Bible.
Well, apparently the brother's eyes lit up and he said, I have one, but how could that
be?
How could he have not just a rare Bible, but the exact one we were looking for?
We had to wonder if it really was the very rare first edition of the King James Bible.
How would you know if you had a first edition King James Bible?
In 1604 King James I of England endorsed an updated English language translation to
be read in the churches.
The first edition can be identified by a number of unique printing variations.
The combination of variations that occur in a given Bible serves as the kind of fingerprint.
The variation most commonly associated with the first edition of the King James Bible
is founded Ruth chapter 3 verse 15, which reads, he went into the city.
Subsequent editions have the rendering she went into the city.
So the first edition is commonly known as the he Bible.
We were excited when we saw that the donated copyright he went into the city.
When the Bible arrived, it was obvious that the binding of this 400-dural book needed
restoration, but the pages of the Bible were an excellent condition.
A brother from Belgium, who was a specialist in book conservation, was able to come and
teach us how to restore this valuable Bible.
We started the process of restoration by carefully removing each page.
And we gently cleaned the pages and made any needed repairs.
Next we rebound the Bible using techniques that were used at the time when it was printed.
Lastly, we bound the Bible in a leather cover.
It has been fully restored so that it may be enjoyed for many years to come.
The King James Bible is one of the most significant books in the English language.
According to the British Library, the King James or authorized version of the Bible remains
the most widely published text in the English language.
Some estimate the number of printed copies to be over one billion.
Protestant missionaries often used it as the basis for translating the Bible into other
languages.
This made its influence even greater.
While through the centuries, as the King James Bible was circulated, the name of Jehovah
became known around the earth.
We have also received two very important Spanish language Bible translations, the Reina Bible
and the Reina Valera Bible.
Both were produced during the height of the Spanish Inquisition.
By the close of the 15th century, the Spanish Inquisition forbade the translation and possession
of the Scriptures in any vernacular or common language.
Three centuries passed before the ban was finally lifted.
During that difficult time, a few valiant translators produced new Spanish versions abroad and
had them smuggled into Spain.
In the mid-1500s, living on a constant fear of arrest, Casiodoro the Reina began translating
the Bible into Spanish.
This man loved God's name.
He once said the custom of a meeting God's name perpetrated by the devil arose from a superstition
of modern rabbis who, although claiming to revered, in fact buried his holy name, making
God's people forget that by which he wished to be distinguished from all other gods.
In 1569, Casiodoro de Reina's translation was finally printed.
It preserved the divine name Jehovah throughout the Hebrew Scriptures.
Then in 1582, another brave scholar, Cipriano de Valera, carefully began to revise Reina's
translation.
He was 50 years old when he started and he labored on this translation for the next 20 years.
In 1602, his work was finally published in Amsterdam.
Valera also valued the divine name and he used it throughout the Hebrew Scriptures.
Today his translation is known as the Reina Valera Bible.
It has become one of the most widely used translations in the Spanish-speaking world.
These Bibles remind us of the intense struggle that has taken place to translate the Bible
into common languages and to preserve the divine name.
Our brothers have manifested tremendous generosity by donating these Bibles and we continue
to be amazed by the Bibles that we are receiving.
Consider another unique example.
In 1964, a man found a 250-year-old Latin Bible in the basement of a church.
This was a unique find.
The most common edition of the Latin Bible, translated by Jerome, was completed in the year
405.
It came to be known as the Latin Volgate.
Sadly, it does not use the divine name.
However, the Bible that was found in the church basement consistently uses God's name
throughout the Hebrew Scriptures.
It was the 1708 edition of the Latin translation, produced by Sebastian Schmidt.
At first when the man discovered this Bible, he was told to burn it, but he just couldn't.
Recently, this man began studying the Bible with Jehovah's Witnesses.
When he heard about the Bible display, he donated this very interesting Latin Bible.
Later, when he came to the display and saw the Bible there, he said,
After 50 years of this Bible sitting in my house, it is thrilling to see thousands of
people finally able to enjoy it.
In the early 16th century, many people had a strong desire to know more about the Bible.
By that time, the Latin Volgate had been the common Bible for more than 1,000 years,
but sadly, most people could not read Latin.
Adding to the problem, many errors had crept into the Volgate as it was copied over the
centuries.
Translators and scholars realized that they needed to go back to the original languages
if they were to produce accurate Bible translations that would satisfy the growing thirst for
scriptural knowledge.
In 1,502, Cardinal Jimenez, the Cisneros, began work on what would become a historic Bible
translation tool.
Today it is known as the Complutensian Polyglot.
Cisneros began gathering as many ancient manuscripts as he could find in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin.
Then a team of scholars started to compare the manuscripts with the idea of producing
one complete master text for each of the three languages.
It took the scholars ten years to compile this monumental work, and then the actual printing
took another four years.
Spanish printers did not have the necessary type files and had to prepare them before the
Bible could be printed.
Finally, between 1,514 and 1,517, the 6th volume set was printed.
After some 15 years of effort, this was an overwhelming accomplishment.
It was the first time that Hebrew, Greek, and Latin master text for the entire Bible were
printed side by side, making them easy to compare.
Actually, this was the first time that the complete New Testament had ever been printed
in Greek.
However, the Pope did not give approval to the Polyglot until years later, delaying its
public release until 1,522.
The Complotension Polyglot was an important step in the refinement and preservation of the
Greek and Hebrew text of God's Word.
Of the approximately 600 copies originally printed, only about 1-5th are known to have
survived until today.
At about the same time that the Complotension Polyglot was produced, another scholar,
Tiziderios Erasmus, was working on his Greek New Testament.
He too wanted to make available the complete printed Greek New Testament for the use of
scholars and Bible translators.
He was able to publish his work in 1,516.
Because the distribution of the Complotension Polyglot was delayed, Erasmus Greek New Testament
became the first complete printed edition available to scholars.
Not breaking translators such as Martin Luther and William Tyndale used various editions
of his text to accomplish their work of translating the Greek scriptures into German and English.
We are pleased to inform you that the Complotension Polyglot and Erasmus Greek New Testament of
1516 have both been donated to the Bible display.
Of course, those who have visited the display may have difficulty imagining that we would
have enough space to include these fascinating Bibles there.
We are pleased to announce that the designated area for the Bible display at Warwick will
be much larger.
Would you like to see what it will look like?
The governing body has directed that the display should feature the Bible.
The Bible itself should be the star of the display.
And in particular, the focus should be on Jehovah's name.
Therefore, the overall design of the display will communicate a feeling of deep respect
and reverence for God's Word.
We will use strong architectural features to illustrate the strength and security that
come from reading and applying God's Word.
The lighting and interior design will help to create a spiritually reflective environment.
The main part of the display will be permanent in nature.
We will continue to tell of the story of the Bible and the divine name as in the current
exhibit in Brooklyn.
There will also be an area for additional exhibits where we will display many other rare
and unique Bibles.
This area will be updated periodically.
Of course, the Bibles that we have discussed are only a few of the many that have been
generously donated.
We have also received items such as the Leipzig Polyglot and the Julia E. Smith Bible.
Julia E. Smith was the first woman to make a complete English translation of the Bible
from the original Hebrew and Greek.
She produced a literal translation and in her work, she chose to preserve the divine name.
We can't mention all of the donations in this brief update, but if you visit the Bible
display when it opens in Warwick, New York, you will be able to see many of them there.
By that time, we hope to have received even more rare and unique Bibles to add to the
display.
These Bibles remind us of the many God-fearing people down through the ages who work tirelessly
to preserve God's Word and to make known His holy name.
They also show that Jehovah has fulfilled His promise to preserve His Word and to magnify
His name in all the earth.
We invite all of you to come and see the Bible display at our current World Headquarters
in Brooklyn and later when it is greatly expanded in Warwick.
We are certain that it will deepen your appreciation for God's precious Word and for His
matchless name, Jehovah.